Let's do an example now of a random
walk Metropolis-Hastings sampler for
our continuous variable.
Recall the model from the last segment
of lesson two where the data or
the percentage change in total personnel
from last year to this year for
ten companies.
To remind us, I have the model right here.
So yi represents the percent
change in personnel for
company i, and given mu, the mean,
each of these ys is
identically distributed and
independent from this normal distribution
with mean mu and variance 1.
Our prior distribution on mu is
the t-distribution with location 0,
scale parameter 1 and
degrees of freedom 1.
This is also referred to as
the co-sheet distribution.
Because this model is not conjugate,
the posterior distribution does not have
a standard form that we can easily sample.
To get posterior samples, we're going
to need to setup a Markov chain,
who's stationary distribution is
the posterior distribution we want.
So, recall that the posterior
distribution has this form.
We derived this expression for
the posterior in lesson two.
The posterior distribution for
mu is proportional to this
expression on the right.
This function here will be our g of mu.
The first thing we can do in R
is to write a function that
will evaluate g of mu for us.
Because posterior distributions
include likelihoods,
which are the product of many
numbers that are potentially small,
because they're like probabilities,
g of mu might evaluate to such
a small number that the computer
treats it effectively as a zero.
To avoid this problem, we're going
to work on the logarithmic scale
which will be more numerically stable.
So instead of computing this g function,
we're going to compute the log of g.
If we take the log of this function,
we get this expression right here.
So let's write this function in R,
let's call it lg for the log of g
It'll be a function and
it will take three different arguments.
We need to have y bar,
we need to enter n, and
we need to enter a value for
mu for this function to evaluate.
So we need mu, n and y bar.
Just like with a for loop, we need curly
braces when we're defining a function.
Okay, the first thing we'll
calculate is mu squared and
we're going to call it mu 2 as
a variable inside this function.
It's just the square of mu.
Then we'll output this
expression right here, so
it needs to be n*(ybar*mu-
mu2 divided by 2).
Let's actually space these out
a little bit so it's easier to read.
Minus the log(1.0+mu2).
This completes the log of g function and
we can read this in to our R console.
Next, let's write a function to execute
the random walk Metropolis-Hasting
sampler.
And we're going to use normal
proposal distributions to do this.
As we write the function,
let's take a look at the algorithm
here to remind us how it goes.
I'm going to call this function mh for
Metropolis-Hastings.
We need a few more
arguments in this function.
First, we need a couple of the arguments
from before and the sample size.
y bar which is the sample mean of y.
We need to choose how many iterations
we're going to run this sampler for.
So I'll call that n_iter,
that represents how many iterations.
We need an initial value for mu.
We'll call that mu_init.
And finally,
we need a standard deviation for
the candidate generating
normal distribution.
So let's call that candidate
standard deviation.
These are the arguments we'll
need in our function here.
Okay, so first, we need to do step 1
which is to set up an initial value.
Before we do that,
let's initialize a vector of mu values
that we will output with this function.
So mu out will get a numeric
vector with n.iter entries.
It's useful with the Metropolis-Hastings
algorithm to keep track of how often
our candidates get accepted.
So let's create a variable called accept.
And we'll initialize it as 0.
Now as we iterate through, we're going
to be updating our value for mu.
As we update it we need
to store it somewhere.
Let's call that mu_now.
And we'll initialize it as the first
value, the initial value for mu.
We also need a current value for
the log of g function, lg_now.
This is going to be an evaluation
of the lg function.
So we need to give it three arguments,
mu, which will be mu_now, n,
which is always just n and
we'll need to give it y-bar.
This completes step one of
setting initial values and
initializing a random work
Metropolis-Hasting sampler.
So now let's move on to step two
where we need to repeat
the following steps many times.
This means we are going to do it in a for
loop.
So for i will iterate over the variable i,
in 1, 2 n_iter,
that's our number of iterations,
we're going to do the following.
The first thing we need to
do is draw a candidate for
our parameter mu from
a proposal distribution.
So let's draw mu candidate.
We'll call our variable mu candidate.
And it'll be a draw from
a normal distribution, rnorm.
We'll take a single draw
where the mean of this
distribution is the current value of mu.
And the standard deviation is
the candidate standard deviation.
So this is where we'll draw the candidate.
The second step in the Metropolis–Hastings
algorithm is to compute
the acceptance ratio.
In our case, the candidate
generating distribution is normal,
which is symmetric.
So these queue distributions
in the Metropolis-Hastings ratio
will cancel each other out.
So the ratio will actually
be g evaluated at
the candidate divided by g
evaluated at the old value.
For numerical stability,
we will calculate this on the log scale.
So the first thing we want to do is get
the log of g evaluated at the candidate.
So lg using our candidate
that we just drew.
To do this we will call our
lg function again where
mu is now going to be
equal to mu candidate.
Again, n will equal n and
y bar will be y bar.
We now have the log of g evaluated for
the candidate draw.
We now need it for
the log of g evaluated at the last value.
But we already have that, tt's lg_now.
So we are now ready to calculate alpha,
the acceptance ratio.
Of course we've done this on the log
scale so let's call this log alpha.
And it equals lg evaluated
at the candidate minus lg,
the current lg, lg_now,
this is the log of alpha.
So to get the real alpha,
we just need to exponentiate it
Now that we've calculated alpha,
we're ready to move on to step c here.
So the first thing we're going to do
is draw from the uniform distribution.
We'll save it in the variable called u.
Runit(1) that takes a draw for
the uniform distribution between 0 and 1.
Then, if, u is less than alpha,
that gives us an event that
happens with probability alpha,
then we're going to do the following.
With probability alpha,
we're going to accept the candidate.
In other words, mu_now, the current
iteration of mu will become mu candidate.
We also want to keep track of how
often we are accepting the candidates.
So let's add 1 to the acceptance count.
Since we accepted the candidate,
we need to update lg_now to be
lg evaluated at the candidate.
Finally, within this loop,
we need to collect to save our results.
So let's put this in, mu_out.
This is the vector that we initialized
at the beginning of the function.
So, the ith entry of mu_out
is going to get mu_now.
Finally, we need to determine what our
function is going to return at the end.
What we need are our samples from
the Metropolis-Hastings sampler.
So we need to output mu_out.
And it would be helpful also to
output our final acceptance count.
We can have a function return
multiple outputs through a list.
So the last line of the function
will include a list
where we're going to output two things.
mu, which will be our vector, mu.out.
That contains all our samples from
the Metropolis-Hastings sampler.
And then we'll return the accept rate.
So it'll be our acceptance count,
accpt, that
counts how many acceptances we had,
divided by the number of iterations.
That gives us the acceptance rate.
This completes our function for
the Metropolis-Hastings sampler.